---

So you've just got a new Raspberry Pi, but only have a laptop around you? Don't worry, you don't need anything else.
Alright, so let me start by defining what exactly what a 'headless' computer is. It's a computer that doesn't have a monitor, keyboard or mouse connected to it.
Next, let's get to what exactly we'll cover in this article.
Requirements:
Raspberry Pi & an SD Card of size minimum 8GB. I'd also recommend at least a Class 10 card so that it isn't too slow.
A network that let's devices see each other i.e. it must have network discovery enabled. Don't worry about this though, most home networks are setup like this by default.
A decent power supply for the Raspberry Pi. You should also make sure that you don't lose power during the setup, because that can corrupt the SD Card & you have to start all over again.

So you have all you need? Alright, let's begin the setup.

---

Now there are a lot of Operating Systems you can use on the Raspberry Pi, including Windows 11 or ARM! But for beginners I'd recommend Raspberry Pi OS because it not only is very easy to setup headless, but it's got all the stuff you need to get started.
Download the Raspberry Pi Imager from here: https://www.raspberrypi.com/software/
So here you've got two options. The Raspberry Pi OS Lite, and the one with a desktop. Let's briefly go over these:
Raspberry Pi OS with Desktop This is what I'd recommend if you're new to Linux and haven't used the command line before. It's got the CLI & a desktop, and some nice stuff like Thonny IDE & a GUI App/package updater sprinkled on top of it.
Raspberry Pi Lite. This is the one for you if you're familiar with (or are not scared of) the terminal. It's the most lightweight of all. It's going to save quite a lot of resources if you run it as a server and don't have any use case for the GUI.

Personally I'd recommend you to flash the Raspberry Pi OS Lite, even if you've never used the terminal. Since it's a better way to do stuff, why not start from this right from Day 1?!
Now open Raspberry Pi Imager. Choose your ISO, then click on 'Settings' on the bottom right corner. Let's go through the initial configuration steps real quick:
SSH (password based): This is the bare minimum you need. It's headless, and SSH is how you'll interact with it over the network.
WiFi, only if you need it: So this is the optional configuration. In case you're using WPA3-Personal only for your network, make sure to change it to WPA2/WPA3 mixed mode.

Now flash the image, plug the SD Card into the Raspberry Pi, and plug the Raspberry Pi in. The Raspberry Pi will boot up automatically.
Alright, so the Raspberry Pi is online and accessible, so now we need to get it's IP Address.
The default hostname for the Raspberry Pi is raspberrypi.
There are 2 ways to find it out:
Use a network/IP Address scanner on your PC. I'd recommend Advanced IP Scanner.
Go to your router settings. The list of leased IP Address is mostly under 'DHCP Client List' or 'List of connected devices' or something similar. A quick web search should tell you the steps for your specific router.

Let's assume the IP Address is 192.168.1.101. Take note of this, you'll need it later.
Alright, so now we've finally got everything we need. Now head on to the Windows Terminal. Run this.
ping 192.168.1.101
This command pings your Raspberry Pi and, if everything's alright, your Raspberry Pi will return something like this:
PING 192.168.1.1 (192.168.1.101) 56(84) bytes of data.
64 bytes from 192.168.1.101: icmp_seq=1 ttl=64 time=0.088 ms
64 bytes from 192.168.1.101: icmp_seq=2 ttl=64 time=0.068 ms
64 bytes from 192.168.1.101: icmp_seq=3 ttl=64 time=0.076 ms
This basically tells you that the Raspberry Pi is available and ready to receive connections.
For accessing the command line:
Run this command to connect via SSH:
ssh pi@192.168.1.101
Enter your password (it's 'raspberry' by default) and that's it! You're connected the Pi, and ready to rock! Now I'd highly recommend updating to the latest stuff.
sudo apt update
sudo apt upgrade
And there you go!
For accessing the GUI/Desktop
Now if you've installed the 'desktop' or GUI, you need to manually activate VNC in order to connect to and use the interface.
Follow the steps above to connect via SSH, then run this command:
sudo raspi-config
Go to Preferences > Raspberry Pi Configuration > Enable VNC.
In order to connect to your Raspberry Pi, I'd recommend RealVNC VNC Viewer. Download it from https://www.realvnc.com/en/connect/download/viewer/.
Just enter the Raspberry Pi's IP Address, enter your password (it's 'raspberry' by default), and that's it!

---

So that's how you get started with a Raspberry Pi. I'll also post another article regarding how to use APT & the Debian Linux terminal to do basic stuff, so stay tuned for that one.
This is the first article I've ever written, and I feel like it's a bit too long. But I've tried to explain all possible scenarios so…anyways, let me know what you think!