Note: The benefits and drawbacks mentioned here are true as of August, 2023, and are only relevant for the Indian subcontinent. Please check your bank's website for up-to-date information on their credit card offerings.
Let's start with  a little backstory of mine. I'm currently a student studying engineering. I personally don't have any source of income, but in my family we spend a lot of online shopping (mostly on medicine & household groceries). Since I am the only person in my family who is eligible to get a credit card, I decided to give it a shot.
>> Why even apply for a credit card? Is there any benefits to using one?
The most appropriate answer to this question is 'it depends'. Let me explain in the context of a general-purpose SBI Card, SBI SimplyCLICK Advantage.
First, let's look at the Fees & Other Charges.
Annual Fee (one time): Rs. 499
Renewal Fee (per annum): Rs. 499 from second year onwards. Renewal Fee reversed if annual spends for last year >= Rs.1,00,000
Add-on Fee (per annum): Nil

There are a lot of parameters you need to consider when deciding if you even need a credit card or not, but the general guideline is that if you spend a lot online or at stores using your card (or intend to do so), then you can actually benefit from using one. You not only get your renewal fees reversed, you can also enjoy the extra reward points and discounts offered at these online/offline stores.
Next, let's look at the Reward Point system.
Earn 1 reward point per Rs.100 on all other spends.
Earn 10X Reward Points on online spends with exclusive partners: Apollo 24x7/BookMyShow/ Cleartrip/ Dominos/ Eazydiner/ Myntra/ Netmeds/ Yatra.
Earn 5X Reward Points on all other online spends.

In general, 1 reward point equates to 0.25 INR, or 25 paise. The only time a credit card will be worth it is if you actually spend substantial sums of money throughout the year. If you don't, you have to pay quite a lot of money just to keep it active, so a debit card makes more sense in that case.
>> What are the drawbacks to using one? Is there anything I need to be aware of?
Yes. Since a credit card technically works differently when compared to a simple debit card, you need to have a basic idea about how it works.
You spend some amount of money using your credit card, throughout a particular month. The process is the same as with a debit card. Some back-end payment providers like RuPay also allow you to link your card with UPI, so you can use that if your card supports it.
At the beginning of the next month, you get your credit card bill. It's either delivered via e-mail or you can get it delivered via post. You typically need to pay your outstanding bill within the 5–10th of each month.
Ways to Pay: There are typically 2 ways to pay your outstanding bill.
Option 1: Pay manually using any payment method like debit card/UPI/Net Banking, etc.
Option 2: Get yourself enrolled for auto-debit facility from SBI. This works if you also have an SBI Savings Account linked to your card. In this case, the amount is automatically debited from your Savings Account at a predefined date each month.